[PC-1206][PC-965][PC-1204] Application Note - Nicla Voice - Intruder Detector (#971)
arduino/docs-content: content/hardware/06.nicla/boards/nicla-voice/tutorials/ei-intruder-detector/content.md

---
title: 'Door Intruder Detector Using ML with the Nicla Voice'
description: "This application note describes how to identify normal door opening vs a forced attempt, looking for intruders by analyzing surroundings sounds using Machine Learning with Edge Impulse and the Nicla Voice to then be monitored with a Dashboard on the Arduino IoT Cloud."
difficulty: intermediate
tags:
  - Intruder detector
  - Nicla
  - Portenta
  - BLE
  - Machine Learning
  - Edge Impulse
  - Sound recognition
  - Arduino IoT Cloud
  - Application Note
author: 'Christopher Mendez'
libraries:
  - name: ArduinoBLE
    url: https://reference.arduino.cc/reference/en/libraries/arduinoble/
  - name: ArduinoIoTCloud
    url: https://github.com/arduino-libraries/ArduinoIoTCloud
  - name: Arduino_ConnectionsHandler
    url: https://github.com/arduino-libraries/Arduino_ConnectionHandler
software:
  - ide-v1
  - ide-v2
  - arduino-cli
  - web-editor
  - iot-cloud
  - edge-impulse
  - arduino-agent
hardware:
  - hardware/06.nicla/boards/nicla-voice
---

## Introduction

> Security has always been a very important factor for our well-being, from the personal to the material, keeping our assets safe is something we struggle with every day, in our cars, lockers, computers, our houses, we insure everything is locked up, but there are times when that is not enough. In such a connected world, where we have a lot of information in the palm of our hand, it would also be very useful to have the status of those things that we have insured in a more analogous way, such as the front door of our home. Using its integrated microphone the Nicla Voice is an ideal option to achieve this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Security has always been a very important factor for our well-being, from the personal to the material, keeping our assets safe is something we struggle with every day, in our cars, lockers, computers, our houses, we insure everything is locked up, but there are times when that is not enough. 

In such a connected world, where we have a lot of information in the palm of our hand, it would also be very useful to have the status of those things that we have insured in a more analogous way, such as the front door of our home. Leveraging the integrated microphone of the Nicla Voice provides the possibility to build this kind of protection system.
```
General suggestion for better readability and suggesting a rephrase if possible.

## Goals

> The goal of this application note is to showcase an intruder detection and monitoring system for a house front door using the Nicla Voice + a Portenta H7 as a host and the Arduino IoT Cloud. This project's objectives are the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this application note is to showcase an intruder detection and monitoring system for the front door of the house using a combination of Nicla Voice and Portenta H7 as a host, and the Arduino IoT Cloud. This project's objectives are the following:
```
A small suggestion

Author: Done, I thought I fixed it before. Thanks

> - Analyze the surrounding sounds with the Nicla Voice integrated microphone and run artificial intelligence algorithms at the edge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Analyze the surrounding sounds with the onboard microphone of the Nicla Voice and run artificial intelligence algorithms at the edge.
```
A small suggestion

> - Correctly identify if a door is opened or tried to be forced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Correctly identify if a door has been opened in an ordinary manner or suffered a forced attempt.
```
A small suggestion

- Report opening and intruder detection events through BLE to a Host.
- The host must forward the data from the Nicla Voice to the Arduino IoT cloud using an Internet connection (Wi-Fi® in this case).

> - The cloud variables are updated just on change and will be presented on an Arduino IoT Cloud dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The cloud variables are updated just on change and displayed actively on the Arduino IoT Cloud dashboard.
```
A small suggestion

- Gather real-world data to train a Machine Learning model.

Here is a graphical setup of the whole application:

![Intruder Detector final deployment](assets/system_setup.png)

## Hardware and Software Requirements

![Arduino Pro boards and 3D enclosures](assets/hardware.png)

### Hardware Requirements
- Nicla Voice.
- 3.7v LiPo battery.
- Portenta H7.
- USB-C® cable.
- Micro USB cable.
- 5VDC wall power adapter.
- DC brushless fan Model: LD3007MS.
- Nicla Voice 3D printed enclosure.
- Portenta H7 3D printed enclosure.

### Software Requirements

> - [Arduino IDE 1.8.10+](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), [Arduino IDE 2.0+](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), or [Arduino Web Editor](https://create.arduino.cc/editor)
> - If you are going to use an offline Arduino IDE, you must install the following libraries: `ArduinoBLE`, `ArduinoIoTCloud`, and `Arduino_ConnectionsHandler`. You can install them using the Arduino IDE Library Manager.
> - The [intruder detector example code](assets/Nicla_Portenta_Codes.zip).
> - [Edge Impulse CLI](https://docs.edgeimpulse.com/docs/edge-impulse-cli/cli-overview), which you can install following these [instructions](https://docs.edgeimpulse.com/docs/edge-impulse-cli/cli-installation).
> - Nicla Voice audio [firmware](https://cdn.edgeimpulse.com/firmware/arduino-nicla-voice-firmware.zip) to upload recordings to Edge Impulse.
> - [Syntiant® uploader and precompiled ML model](assets/Syntiant_Uploader.zip).
> - [Arduino Agent](https://create.arduino.cc/getting-started/plugin/welcome) to add the Portenta H7 to the IoT Cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Arduino IDE 1.8.10+](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), [Arduino IDE 2.0+](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), or [Arduino Web Editor](https://create.arduino.cc/editor)
- If you are going to use an offline Arduino IDE, you must install the following libraries: `ArduinoBLE`, `ArduinoIoTCloud`, and `Arduino_ConnectionsHandler`. You can install them using the Arduino IDE Library Manager.
- The [intruder detector example code](assets/Nicla_Portenta_Codes.zip)
- [Edge Impulse® CLI](https://docs.edgeimpulse.com/docs/edge-impulse-cli/cli-overview), which you can install following these [instructions](https://docs.edgeimpulse.com/docs/edge-impulse-cli/cli-installation)
- Nicla Voice audio [firmware](https://cdn.edgeimpulse.com/firmware/arduino-nicla-voice-firmware.zip) to upload recordings to Edge Impulse®.
- [Syntiant® uploader and precompiled ML model](assets/Syntiant_Uploader.zip)
- [Arduino Agent](https://create.arduino.cc/getting-started/plugin/welcome) to add the Portenta H7 to the IoT Cloud
```
A minor update

## The Machine Learning Model

> In simple words, Machine Learning is a way of programming in which we make our device to process raw data from sensors and extract meaningful features from it to be learned and later used for identifying or predicting the originally trained scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Machine Learning is a way of programming in which we make our device process raw data from sensors and learn based on extracted characteristic features. Later, use these data for identifying or predicting the originally trained scenarios.
```
A small suggestion

Reviewer 2: Nice solution. Solved.

To be able to identify when the door is being opened or when it is being forced by someone, we trained a machine learning model using the [Edge Impulse](https://www.edgeimpulse.com/) integration with the [Arduino Cloud](https://cloud.arduino.cc/), that will be running repetitively in the Nicla Voice.

First, we flashed the Nicla Voice with an [audio ingestion firmware](https://cdn.edgeimpulse.com/firmware/arduino-nicla-voice-firmware.zip) to record and upload samples to our Edge Impulse project of three different scenarios that we want to identify later. 

Here is our model design:

![Edge Impulse Model blocks](assets/model_design.png)

> As we are using the Nicla Voice we must follow the showed model design to be supported by the onboard Syntiant® NDP120 Neural Decision Processor™, taking care of these characteristics:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we are using the Nicla Voice, we must follow the model design to be supported by the onboard Syntiant® NDP120 Neural Decision Processor™, taking care of these characteristics:
```
A small suggestion

In the time series data block:

> - Window size: 968 ms.
> - Window increase: 484 ms.
> - Frequency: 16000 Hz.
> 
> In the processing block:
> 
> - **Audio (Syntiant).**
> - This DSP block computes log Mel-filterbank energy features from audio signals.
> 
> In the learning block:
> 
> - **Classification.**
> - This block includes the Neural Network architecture to learn patterns from audio data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Window size: 968 ms
- Window increase: 484 ms
- Frequency: 16000 Hz

In the processing block:

- **Audio (Syntiant)**
- This DSP block computes log Mel-filterbank energy features from audio signals

In the learning block:

- **Classification**
- This block includes the Neural Network architecture to learn patterns from audio data.
```
A small suggestion

First, we flashed the Nicla Voice with an [audio ingestion firmware](https://cdn.edgeimpulse.com/firmware/arduino-nicla-voice-firmware.zip) to record and upload samples to our Edge Impulse project of three different scenarios that we want to identify later. 

Here is our model design:

![Edge Impulse Model blocks](assets/model_design.png)

As we are using the Nicla Voice we must follow the showed model design to be supported by the onboard Syntiant® NDP120 Neural Decision Processor™, taking care of these characteristics:

In the time series data block:

- Window size: 968 ms.
- Window increase: 484 ms.
- Frequency: 16000 Hz.

In the processing block:

- **Audio (Syntiant).**
- This DSP block computes log Mel-filterbank energy features from audio signals.

In the learning block:

- **Classification.**
- This block includes the Neural Network architecture to learn patterns from audio data. 

Here is a graphical representation of how the samples look before and after the digital signal processing:

> ![Raw audio samples and their spectrograms](assets/samples_dsp_white.png)

Reviewer 2: Solved with the bullet points

Here is the neural network classifier configuration for this application:

![Neural Network Configuration](assets/nn_setup_white.png)

> After the model is trained with a lot of samples of a door being opened, being forced and nothing happening, we got considerable good results that we can evidentiate on the "Confusion matrix" with a 97.4% of accuracy being achieved with a validation set of new data.

Reviewer 2: @mcmchris if I'm not wront this is pending. Maybe just using () should be enough

Something like : nothing happening (z_openset) ???

> After the model is trained with a lot of samples of a door being opened, being forced and nothing happening, we got considerable good results that we can evidentiate on the "Confusion matrix" with a 97.4% of accuracy being achieved with a validation set of new data.

Author: In code line 114, I specified that "z_openset" includes both of nothin happening recordings and unknown sounds.

> After the model is trained with a lot of samples of a door being opened, being forced and nothing happening, we got considerable good results that we can evidentiate on the "Confusion matrix" with a 97.4% of accuracy being achieved with a validation set of new data.

Author: But I can add the (z_openset) thing also.

For a new model deployment, use the [Syntiant® uploader](assets/Syntiant_Uploader.zip) and replace the `ei_model.synpkg` with yours.

## Intruder Detector System Setup

In this application, we don't need any particular wiring diagram other than the development boards themself. 

The Nicla Voice will be attached to the guarded door and near the lock, the Portenta H7 host will be somewhere with good Wi-Fi® coverage and not so far from the Nicla Voice due to BLE's narrow range of a couple of meters.

![Nicla Voice and Portenta H7 deployment spots](assets/project_deploy.png)

The Nicla will communicate with the Portenta H7 through BLE advertising any event to the host that will receive and forward the notification to the Arduino IoT cloud using Wi-Fi®.

The Nicla Voice is powered by a LiPo battery inside its enclosure. The Portenta H7 will be powered by a 5VDC USB adapter accompanied by a cooling fan.

## Intruder Detector System Overview

The Nicla Voice attached to the door is running an ML model listening to the surrounding noises and searching for known sounds like the door being opened or the door lock being hit with a metallic tool, for example, to simulate a forcing process.

> If the sounds are recognized with a certainty higher than 70% the event will be considered as occurred and a BLE notification will be sent to the Portenta H7 host updating the door status.

Author: Done

```arduino
#include "NDP.h"
#include <ArduinoBLE.h>

// Alert Service
BLEService alertService("1802");  // Immediate alert

// BLE Alert Characteristic
BLEUnsignedCharCharacteristic alertLevel("2A06",                // standard 16-bit characteristic UUID
                                         BLERead | BLENotify);  // remote clients will be able to get notifications if this characteristic changes

// Bluetooth® Low Energy Battery Level Characteristic
BLEUnsignedCharCharacteristic batteryLevelChar("2A19",                // standard 16-bit characteristic UUID
                                               BLERead | BLENotify);  // remote clients will be able to get notifications if this characteristic changes
```
The Nicla Voice's integrated NDP needs some files stored in the external flash of the board which are:
- mcu_fw_120_v91.synpkg
- dsp_firmware_v91.synpkg
- ei_model.synpkg

> > The files must be named exactly as showed below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
***The files must be named exactly as showed below. To store them in the Nicla Voice memory you must use the [Syntiant Uploader](assets/Syntiant_Uploader.zip), these files won't be overwritten after any sketch update.***
```

> To store them in the Nicla Voice memory you must use the [Syntiant Uploader](assets/Syntiant_Uploader.zip), these files won't be overwritten after any sketch update.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: @mcmchris still duplicated: 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7687624/231228061-25d76d58-f6cd-4384-b095-0b96ffc1601a.png)

Author: Fixed

```arduino
  // Neural Decision Processor firmware and ML model files loading
  NDP.begin("mcu_fw_120_v91.synpkg");
  NDP.load("dsp_firmware_v91.synpkg");
  NDP.load("ei_model.synpkg");
  Serial.println("packages loaded");
  NDP.getInfo();
  Serial.println("Configure mic");
  NDP.turnOnMicrophone();
```

> The main responsibility of the Nicla Voice code is to listen to and identify the trained sounds, the below code section is in charge of comparing the inferred category and taking a certain action between them. In the case the Nicla detects the door opening, the label parameter will turn to "NN0:opened", this will trigger a BLE alert sending command followed by a listening pause to avoid duplicated alerts and a green LED blinking to visually indicate the event. The same for the "NN0:forcing" label, with the difference that in this case the LED flashes red and the alert message changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main responsibility of the Nicla Voice code is to listen to and identify the trained sounds. The below code section is in charge of comparing the inferred category and taking a certain action between them. In the case the Nicla detects the door opening, the label parameter will turn to "NN0:opened", this will trigger a BLE alert sending command followed by a listening pause to avoid duplicated alerts and a green LED blinking to visually indicate the event. The same for the "NN0:forcing" label, with the difference that in this case the LED flashes red and the alert message changes.
```

Punctuation suggestion

```arduino
/**
  Inference Interruption Callback to be executed with every triggered inference,
  it controls the built-in LED's and send the alerts through BLE.
  
  Possible labels: NN0:opened, NN0:forcing

  Alerts: 1 = mild alert (for door opened), 2 = high alert (for intruder detected)

  @param label The inferred category label
*/
void BLEsend(char* label) {

  if (strcmp(label, "NN0:opened") == 0) {
    alertLevel.writeValue(1);
    NDP.noInterrupts();
    nicla::leds.begin();
    nicla::leds.setColor(green);
    delay(3000);
    nicla::leds.end();
    NDP.interrupts();
  }
  if (strcmp(label, "NN0:forcing") == 0) {
    alertLevel.writeValue(2);
    NDP.noInterrupts();
    nicla::leds.begin();
    nicla::leds.setColor(red);
    delay(3000);
    nicla::leds.end();
    NDP.interrupts();
  }
  if (!lowestPower) {
    Serial.println(label);
  }
}
```

> These methods are used to update the characteristics of this application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These methods are used to update the characteristics of this application:
```

small suggestion/improvement

```arduino
alertLevel.writeValue(x);  // x = 1 if the door is opened or x = 2 if the door is forced
batteryLevelChar.writeValue(HigherBatteryLevel);
```

### Portenta H7 Code

> The Portenta H7 needs different libraries to work, in this case, are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Portenta H7 needs the following libraries:
```

Let's keep it simple :)

> - `ArduinoIoTCloud.h` This one handles the IoT Cloud connection and project variables publishing, it can be installed directly from the Arduino Library Manager.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `ArduinoIoTCloud.h` This one handles the Arduino Cloud connection and project variables publishing. It can be installed directly from the Arduino Library Manager.
```

- `Arduino_ConnectionHandler.h` This one manages the Wi-Fi® connection and can be installed directly from the Arduino Library Manager.
- `thingProperties.h` This is automatically generated by the Arduino Cloud, however, if you are using an offline IDE verify it's in the same directory as your sketch.

> In the global parameters, we have two variables that will store the local status of the alerts and the Nicla Voice battery level. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the global parameters, we have two variables that will store the local status of the alerts and the Nicla Voice battery level:
```

Both are great, I just think we can put a colon there

```
The scanning process will automatically stop when it finds a "Nicla Lock" called device, then it will search for its services and characteristics with the `NiclaLockHandler()` function.

```arduino

void loop() {

  // check if a peripheral has been discovered
  BLEDevice peripheral = BLE.available();

  // Turn on the Green LED if the board is successfully connected to the Cloud. On with Low.
  if (ArduinoCloud.connected()) {
    digitalWrite(LEDG, LOW);
  } else {
    digitalWrite(LEDG, HIGH);
  }

  if (peripheral) {
    // peripheral discovered, print out address, local name, and advertised service
    Serial.print("Found ");
    Serial.print(peripheral.address());
    Serial.print(" '");
    Serial.print(peripheral.localName());
    Serial.print("' ");
    Serial.print(peripheral.advertisedServiceUuid());
    Serial.println();

    // Check if the peripheral is a Nicla Lock:
    if (peripheral.localName() == "Nicla Lock") {
      // stop scanning
      BLE.stopScan();

      // Nicla Voice node connection handler
      NiclaLockHandler(peripheral);

      // peripheral disconnected, start scanning again
      BLE.scan();
    }
  }
  ArduinoCloud.update();
}

```

> In order to just get connected with the Nicla Voice, the Portenta searches for the specific "Alert Service" using its UUID `1802` and for the necessary characteristics, the "Battery Level" using the `2A19` UUID  and the "Alert Level" using the `2A06` UUID.

Reviewer 2: @TaddyHC or @canchebagur any idea why the render engine do these strange things with the numbers¿?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7687624/231131053-a05bcfb8-d700-4375-90bc-e02bea874e5c.png)

    peripheral.disconnect();
    return;
  } else {
    Serial.println("Subscribed to Battery Level and Alert Characteristic");
  }
```
Finally, the Portenta verifies continuously if a characteristic is updated to upload it to the Cloud.

```arduino
// while the peripheral is connected
  while (peripheral.connected()) {
    
    // check if the value of the characteristic has been updated
    if (batteryLevelChar.valueUpdated()) {

      batteryLevelChar.readValue(BatteryValue);

      Serial.print("Battery Level: ");
      Serial.print(BatteryValue);
      Serial.println(" %");

      battery = BatteryValue;
    }

    // check if the value of the characteristic has been updated
    if (alertLevel.valueUpdated()) {

      alertLevel.readValue(AlertValue);

      Serial.print("Alert: ");
      Serial.println(AlertValue);

      
      if (AlertValue == 1) {    // if the Alert = 1 means the door was opened
        control = !control;     // as variables are updated if they change, add a simple dot "." to be able to update it if happens twice consecutive.
        if (control) {
          DoorEvent = "Door opened";
        } else {
          DoorEvent = "Door opened.";

>         }

Reviewer 2: Interesting trick

        alertStatus = false;

      } else if (AlertValue == 2) {   // if the Alert = 2 means the door was forced
        control = !control;           // as variables are updated if they change, add a simple dot "." to be able to update it if happens twice consecutive.
        if (control) {
          DoorEvent = "Intruder detected!";
        } else {
          DoorEvent = "Intruder detected!.";
        }

        alertStatus = true;
      }
    }

    // turn off green LED if disconnected from Cloud.
    if (ArduinoCloud.connected()) {
      digitalWrite(LEDG, LOW);
    } else {
      digitalWrite(LEDG, HIGH);
    }

    ArduinoCloud.update();
  }
```
### The Cloud Dashboard

> Taking advantage of the Arduino Cloud, we can seamlessly integrate a simple but powerful dashboard to monitor and visualize the status of the system in real-time as you can see below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Taking advantage of the Arduino Cloud, we can seamlessly integrate a simple but powerful dashboard to monitor and visualize the status of the system in real-time:
```

It is great but I think we can save that text with no problems :)

![Arduino Cloud project dashboard ](assets/dashboard.png)

> Within the Arduino Cloud's dashboard, the system variables can be monitored, we have a battery level indicator widget accompanied by a time series graph, a chat-looking widget to store the events historically, a red LED to shine when an intruder is detected by the system, and a green LED to show the BLE connection status between the Nicla Voice and the Portenta H7 host. We can easily access this dashboard from a PC, mobile phone or tablet from anywhere, receiving an instantaneous update wherever we are. In addition, we can set different integrations to complement our project, for example, setting up an IFTTT automation to receive an email whenever an alert is fired.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Within the Arduino Cloud's dashboard, the system variables can be monitored. We have a battery level indicator widget accompanied by a time series graph, a chat-looking widget to store the events historically, a red LED to shine when an intruder is detected by the system, and a green LED to show the BLE connection status between the Nicla Voice and the Portenta H7 host. We can easily access this dashboard from a PC, mobile phone or tablet from anywhere, receiving an instantaneous update wherever we are. In addition, we can set different integrations to complement our project, for example, setting up an IFTTT automation to receive an email, an cellphone notification, or even triggering some automation like turning on all the lights at home whenever an alert is fired.
```

Your first sentences are always great and explain the main idea in just a few words. They are full meaning so we can put an stop there to avoid longer phrases.

Some suggestions, the good thing about an IFTTT service is that you can connect things to things in a very easy way, we can even start to play some music on smart speakers to give the thief the impression that someone is at home.

![Door opening event](assets/opened_door.png)

![Intruder detected event](assets/forced_door.png)

## Full Intruder Detector Example

> The complete code can be downloaded [here](assets/Nicla_Portenta_Codes.zip), the 3D models can be downloaded [here](assets/Intruder_Detector_3D_Files.zip). The Edge Impulse project is public [here](https://mltools.arduino.cc/public/204744/latest) so you can clone it and modify it to adapt it to your needs by improving the dataset or model architecture for a custom deployment.

Reviewer 2: I think I've found a better way to improve this part of the application notes cc @TaddyHC @canchebagur @Jorgetrujilloroman 

```suggestion

All the necessary files to replicate this application notes can be found below:

* The complete code can be downloaded [here](assets/Nicla_Portenta_Codes.zip)
* The enclosure 3D printed models can be downloaded [here](assets/Intruder_Detector_3D_Files.zip). 
* The Edge Impulse project is public [here](https://mltools.arduino.cc/public/204744/latest) so you can clone it and modify it to adapt it to your needs by improving the dataset or model architecture for a custom deployment.
```

I don't know what you guys think but I would say this can improve this section and make more clear to the user where are the files

## Conclusion

> In this application note, we have learned how to implement a Machine learning project powered by Edge Impulse and the Arduino IoT Cloud at the edge using a Nicla Voice and a Portenta H7. This example could be a simple demonstration of how Arduino's environment simplifies the workflow for developing smart solutions to solve real-life situations by integrating "complex" and mighty algorithms with just a few easy-to-follow steps. We covered sound recognition, BLE communication and real-time Cloud monitoring.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this application note, we have learned how to implement a Machine learning project powered by Edge Impulse and the Arduino Cloud at the edge using a Nicla Voice and a Portenta H7. This application could be a simple demonstration of how Arduino's environment simplifies the workflow for developing smart solutions to solve real-life situations by integrating "complex" and mighty algorithms with just a few easy-to-follow steps. We covered sound recognition, BLE communication, and real-time Cloud monitoring.
```
Oxford comma, please change BLE as commented above

### Next Steps

> As you already know how to develop an Intruder Detector with the Nicla Voice and the Portenta H7, it's time for you to continue exploring all the capabilities of the Arduino Pro environment to integrate it with your industrial setup and improve it with powerful solutions. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you already know how to develop an Intruder Detector with the Nicla Voice and the Portenta H7, it's time for you to continue exploring all the capabilities of the Arduino Pro environment to integrate it with your professional setup and improve it with powerful solutions. 
```

---
title: 'Door Intruder Detector Using ML with the Nicla Voice'
description: "This application note describes how to identify when intruders are trying to force an entrance door by analyzing surroundings sounds using a Nicla Voice, Machine Learning Tools, and the Arduino IoT Cloud"
difficulty: intermediate
tags:
  - Intruder detector
  - Nicla
  - Portenta
  - BLE
  - Machine Learning

>   - Edge Impulse

Reviewer 3: Please remove Edge Impulse and just mention Machine Learning Tools instead

Reviewer 2: done

  - Sound recognition
  - Arduino IoT Cloud
  - Application Note
author: 'Christopher Mendez'
libraries:
  - name: ArduinoBLE
    url: https://reference.arduino.cc/reference/en/libraries/arduinoble/
  - name: ArduinoIoTCloud
    url: https://github.com/arduino-libraries/ArduinoIoTCloud
  - name: Arduino_ConnectionsHandler
    url: https://github.com/arduino-libraries/Arduino_ConnectionHandler
software:
  - ide-v1
  - ide-v2
  - arduino-cli
  - web-editor
  - iot-cloud

>   - edge-impulse

Reviewer 3: Machine Learning Tools instead of Edge Impulse. Here the link if it is useful: https://cloud.arduino.cc/machine-learning-tools/

Reviewer 2: We can respect the metadata but is not a big drama to start a new tag so, changed to machine-learning-tools

- The host must forward the data from the Nicla Voice to the Arduino IoT cloud using an Internet connection (Wi-Fi® in this case).
- Create an Arduino Cloud dashboard that syncs in real time to inform and alert the user.
- Gather real-world data to train a Machine Learning model.

## Hardware and Software Requirements

![Nicla Voice, Portenta H7, and 3D enclosures](assets/hardware.png)

### Hardware Requirements
- Nicla Voice
- 3.7 V LiPo battery
- Portenta H7
- USB-C® cable
- Micro USB cable
- 5 VDC wall power adapter
- DC brushless fan Model: LD3007MS
- [Nicla Voice and Portenta H7 3D Printed enclosures](assets/Intruder_Detector_3D_Files.zip)

### Software Requirements
- [Arduino IDE 1.8.10+](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), [Arduino IDE 2.0+](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), or [Arduino Web Editor](https://create.arduino.cc/editor)
- If you are going to use an offline Arduino IDE, you must install the following libraries: `ArduinoBLE`, `ArduinoIoTCloud`, and `Arduino_ConnectionsHandler`. You can install them using the Arduino IDE Library Manager.
- The [intruder detector example code](assets/Nicla_Portenta_Codes.zip)

> - [Edge Impulse® CLI](https://docs.edgeimpulse.com/docs/edge-impulse-cli/cli-overview), which you can install following these [instructions](https://docs.edgeimpulse.com/docs/edge-impulse-cli/cli-installation)

Reviewer 3: Here again, the right path should be from Arduino IoT Cloud, use the Machine Learning Tools integration, basically a white label version of the full Edge Impulse platform. See here an example on how we use this machine learning tools for Nicla Voice: https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/nicla-voice/getting-started-ml

Reviewer 2: I'm afraid we do not have a white laber or more elegant version of the edge impulse cli tool and therefore we have to mention it because it is a tool necessary

However, we can improve the message following the same strategy done at the Nicla Voice Getting Started:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7687624/231392831-42badc90-104d-4de8-9063-5d68634c3d27.png)

- Nicla Voice audio [firmware](https://cdn.edgeimpulse.com/firmware/arduino-nicla-voice-firmware.zip) to upload recordings to Edge Impulse®.
- [Syntiant® uploader and precompiled ML model](assets/Syntiant_Uploader.zip)

> - [Arduino Agent](https://create.arduino.cc/getting-started/plugin/welcome) to add the Portenta H7 to the IoT Cloud

Reviewer 3: The right name is "Arduino Create Agent"

Reviewer 2: indeed, thank you for the catch!

## The Machine Learning Model

The Machine Learning is a way of programming in which we make our device process raw data from sensors and learn based on extracted meaningful features that will be later used for identifying or predicting the originally trained scenarios.

> To be able to identify when the door is being opened or when it is being forced by someone, we trained a machine learning model using the [Edge Impulse](https://www.edgeimpulse.com/) integration with the [Arduino Cloud](https://cloud.arduino.cc/), that will be running repetitively in the Nicla Voice.

Reviewer 3: Please mention here that we are using a machine learning model using the Machine Learning Tools integration powered by Edge Impulse etc.

Reviewer 2: Solved with:

`To be able to identify when the door is being opened or when it is being forced by someone, we trained a machine learning model using the [Machine Learning Tools integration](https://cloud.arduino.cc/machine-learning-tools/) powered by Edge Impulse that will be running repetitively in the Nicla Voice.`

> First, we flashed the Nicla Voice with an [audio ingestion firmware](https://cdn.edgeimpulse.com/firmware/arduino-nicla-voice-firmware.zip) to record and upload samples to our Edge Impulse project of three different scenarios that we want to identify later. 

Reviewer 3: Machine Learning Tools project instead of Edge Impulse

Reviewer 2: Changed to:

First, we flashed the Nicla Voice with an [audio ingestion firmware](https://cdn.edgeimpulse.com/firmware/arduino-nicla-voice-firmware.zip) to record and upload samples to our Machine Learning Tools project of three different scenarios that we want to identify later.

Within the Arduino Cloud's dashboard, the system variables can be monitored. We have a battery level indicator widget accompanied by a time series graph, a chat-looking widget to store the events historically, a red LED to shine when an intruder is detected by the system, and a green LED to show the Bluetooth® Low Energy connection status between the Nicla Voice and the Portenta H7 host. 

We can easily access this dashboard from a PC, mobile phone or tablet from anywhere, receiving an instantaneous update wherever we are. In addition, we can set different integrations to complement our project, for example, setting up an IFTTT automation to receive an email, a cellphone notification, or even triggering some automation like turning on all the lights at home whenever an alert is fired.

![Door opening event](assets/opened_door.png)

![Intruder detected event](assets/forced_door.png)

## Full Intruder Detector Example

All the necessary files to replicate this application notes can be found below:

* The complete code can be downloaded [here](assets/Nicla_Portenta_Codes.zip)
* The enclosure 3D printed models can be downloaded [here](assets/Intruder_Detector_3D_Files.zip). 

> * The Edge Impulse project is public [here](https://mltools.arduino.cc/public/204744/latest) so you can clone it and modify it to adapt it to your needs by improving the dataset or model architecture for a custom deployment.

Reviewer 3: The Machine Learning Tools project instead of Edge Impulse

Reviewer 2: done
